12.1 Qua nova re oblata omnis administratio belli consistit, militesque
aversi a proelio ad studium audiendi et cognoscendi feruntur.  Ubi hostes
ad legatos exercitumque pervenerunt, universi se ad pedes proiciunt;
orant, ut adventus Caesaris exspectetur: captam suam urbem videre: opera
perfecta, turrim subrutam; itaque ab defensione desistere.  Nullam
exoriri moram posse, quominus, cum venisset, si imperata non facerent ad
nutum, e vestigio diriperentur.  Docent, si omnino turris concidisset,
non posse milites contineri, quin spe praedae in urbem irrumperent
urbemque delerent.  Haec atque eiusdem generis complura ut ab hominibus
doctis magna cum misericordia fletuque pronuntiantur.


On this new event, every operation of the war came to a halt, and the
soldiers, having turned away from battle, were brought to an enthusiasm
for listening and learning.  When the enemy reached the commanders and
the army they all threw themselves down at their feet and begged them to
wait for Caesar's arrival.  That they saw their city captured, the
seigeworks completed, the tower undermined, and so would give up their
defense.  That no delay would be able to spring up, that, after his
arrival, if they hadn't followed orders at will they could be pillaged
without delay.  They pointed out that the tower, if it had failed
altogether, wouldn't be able to restrain the soldiers, but that, in hope
for spoils, they'd force their way into the city and destroy it.  These
things and many more of the same sort were proclaimed as by learned men,
with great compassion and tears.

