92.1 Inter duas acies tantum erat relictum spatii, ut satis esset
ad concursum utriusque exercitus.  Sed Pompeius suis praedixerat,
ut Caesaris impetum exciperent neve se loco moverent aciemque eius
distrahi paterentur; idque admonitu C. Triarii fecisse dicebatur,
ut primus incursus visque militum infringeretur aciesque
distenderetur, atque in suis ordinibus dispositi dispersos
adorirentur; leviusque casura pila sperabat in loco retentis
militibus, quam si ipsi immissis telis occurrissent, simul fore,
ut duplicato cursu Caesaris milites exanimarentur et lassitudine
conficerentur.  Quod nobis quidem nulla ratione factum a Pompeio
videtur, propterea quod est quaedam animi incitatio atque
alacritas naturaliter innata omnibus, quae studio pugnae
incenditur; hanc non reprimere, sed augere imperatores debent;
neque frustra antiquitus institutum est, ut signa undique
concinerent clamoremque universi tollerent; quibus rebus et hostes
terreri et suos incitari existimaverunt.

There was so much space left between the two lines that there was
enough for each army to charge.  But Pompey had ordered his men to
receive Caesar's charge and not move from the spot and allow
his line to be split up; and on the recommendation of
C. Triarius he was said to have supposed that the first assault
and the force of the soldiers would be weakened and his lines
overstretched, and the men arranged in their ranks would attack
the scattered ones; and he expected that, with soldiers who'd been
held back in place, spears would lose less force than those that
were hurled on the run, and at the same time that it would be
that, with Caesar's line of advance doubled, the soldiers would be
tired and finished off through exhaustion.  Indeed, that seems to
us to have been done by Pompey for no reason, because there is a
certain enthusiasm of the heart and eagerness inborn naturally to
all men, which zeal for battle is kindled; generals ought, not to
repress this, but to increase it.  Not for nought was it
established in olden times that trumpet calls should sound
together from every side and all men raise the battle-cry; with
which they believed both that the enemy would be frightened and
our own men encouraged.
