65.1 

Quos ubi Afranius procul visos cum Petreio conspexit, nova re
perterritus locis superioribus constitit aciemque instruit.  Caesar in
campis exercitum reficit, ne defessum proelio obiciat; rursus conantes
progredi insequitur et moratur.  Illi necessario maturius, quam
constituerant, castra ponunt.  Suberant enim montes, atque a milibus
passuum V itinera difficilia atque angusta excipiebant.  Hos montes
intrasse cupiebant, ut equitatum effugerent Caesaris praesidiisque in
angustiis collocatis exercitum itinere prohiberent, ipsi sine periculo
ac timore Hiberum copias traducerent.  Quod fuit illis conandum atque
omni ratione efficiendum; sed totius diei pugna atque itineris labore
defessi rem in posterum diem distulerunt.  Caesar quoque in proximo
colle castra ponit.

When Afranius and Petreius caught sight of our men from a distance, they
were frightened by this turn of events and came to a halt on high
ground, drawing up a line of battle.  Caesar refreshed his army in camp,
to keep from exposing them to battle while exhausted.  When the enemy
resumed their march he pursued and harassed them.  They made camp
earlier, of necessity, than they had planned.  For the mountains were
nearby, and they were coming, in another 5 miles, to difficult and
narrow passages.  They wanted to enter these mountains so as to escape
Caesar's cavalry, and to prevent his infantry's passage by means of
detachments stationed in the narrow passes, and so lead their own forces
to the Ebro without danger or fear.  This was what they needed to
attempt and to accomplish at all accounts; but they put it off until the
next day, worn out by an entire day of fighting and marching.  Caesar
likewise made camp next to a hill.
