98.1 Caesar prima luce omnes eos, qui in monte consederant, ex
superioribus locis in planitiem descendere atque arma proicere
iussit.  Quod ubi sine recusatione fecerunt passisque palmis
proiecti ad terram flentes ab eo salutem petiverunt, consolatus
consurgere iussit et pauca apud eos de lenitate sua locutus, quo
minore essent timore, omnes conservavit militibusque suis
commendavit, ne qui eorum violaretur, neu quid sui desiderarent.
Hac adhibita diligentia ex castris sibi legiones alias occurrere
et eas, quas secum duxerat, in vicem requiescere atque in castra
reverti iussit eodemque die Larisam pervenit.


At first light, Caesar ordered everyone who had bivouacked on the
mountain to come down from the heights to the plain and throw down
their arms.  Which they did at once, without balking, and throwing
themselves on the ground with outstretched hands, weeping, begged
him for their safety.  Consolingly, he ordered them to get up, and
after speaking a few words about his leniency in their presence,
to lessen their fear, he spared them all and entrusted them to his
soldiers, so that none of them would be treated with violence, nor
should his own men demand anything from them.  After this
diligence was applied, he ordered the other legions to come to
meet him from camp, and in turn, ordered the legions that he had
brought with him to return to camp.  And reached Larisa on the
same day.
