86.1 Id vero militibus fuit pergratum et iucundum, ut ex ipsa
significatione cognosci potuit, ut, qui aliquid iusti incommodi
exspectavissent, ultro praemium missionis ferrent.  Nam cum de loco
et tempore eius rei controversia inferretur, et voce et manibus
universi ex vallo, ubi constiterant, significare coeperunt, ut
statim dimitterentur, neque omni interposita fide firmum esse posse,
si in aliud tempus differretur.  Paucis cum esset in utramque partem
verbis disputatum, res huc deducitur, ut ei, qui habeant domicilium
aut possessionem in Hispania, statim, reliqui ad Varum flumen
dimittantur; ne quid eis noceatur, neu quis invitus sacramentum
dicere cogatur, a Caesare cavetur.


Surely it was pleasing and agreeable to the soldiers, since it could
be understood from this speech that whoever had expected any sort of
disagreeable justice would, on the other hand, win the favor of a
discharge.  For when the dispute about the place and time for their
meeting was brought up, and everyone had begun to show by voice and
signs, from where they stood on the pallisade, that they should be
demobilized at once, and they could not be secure with any alleged
good faith if this was delayed until another time.  After it had
been discussed in a few words on both sides, the matter was brought
to this point - that they be demobilized.  Those had homes or
property in Spain, straight away, and the rest at the Varus River.
It was stipulated by Caesar that no harm would be done to them, nor
would any unwilling man be forced to swear an oath of allegiance.
