2.3 Interim L Nasidius, a Cn. Pompeio cum classe navium XVI,
in quibus paucae erant aeratae, L. Domitio Massiliensibusque
subsidio missus, freto Siciliae imprudente atque inopinante
Curione pervehitur appulsisque Messanam navibus atque inde
propter repentinum terrorem principum ac senatus fuga facta
navem ex navalibus eorum deducit.  Hac adiuncta ad reliquas
naves cursum Massiliam versus perficit praemissaque clam
navicula Domitium Massiliensesque de suo adventu certiores
facit eosque magnopere hortatur, ut rursus cum Bruti classe
additis suis auxiliis confligant.


Meanwhile, L. Nasidius, whom Pompey had sent to relieve
L. Domitius and the Massilians with a fleet of 16 ships,
including a few with bronze fittings, is conveyed through the
strait of Sicily, past an unsuspecting and unaware Curio, and
with his ships landed at Messana and then, when their leaders
and senate took to their heels in fright, he draws a ship out
from their docks.  After attaching this ship with the others
he sets a course towards Massilia and, secretly sending a
small boat ahead to Domitius and the Massilians with news of
his own assured arrival, he particularly encourages them to
fight again with Brutus's fleet, when his additional
auxiliaries should arrive.
