Book I section [28] 

Brundisini Pompeianorum militum iniuriis atque ipsius Pompei
contumeliis permoti Caesaris rebus favebant.  Itaque cognita Pompei
profectione concursantibus illis atque in ea re occupatis vulgo ex
tectis significabant.  Per quos re cognita Caesar scalas parari
militesque armari iubet, ne quam rei gerendae facultatem dimittat.
Pompeius sub noctem naves solvit.  Qui erant in muro custodiae causa
collocati, eo signo, quod convenerat, revocantur notisque itineribus
ad naves decurrunt.  Milites positis scalis muros ascendunt, sed
moniti a Brundisinis, ut vallum caecum fossasque caveant, subsistunt
et longo itinere ab his circumducti ad portum perveniunt duasque
naves cum militibus, quae ad moles Caesaris adhaeserant, scaphis
lintribusque reprehendunt, reprehensas excipiunt.



The Brundisians, roused by the abuses of Pompey's soldiers and the
insults of Pompey himself, supported Caesar's cause.  And so, having
learned of Pompey's departure, while the soldiers were rushing
about, occupied in the matter, they made this known from their
house-roofs.  And Caesar, having learned of the business through
them, orders the ladders to be readied and the soldiers to be armed,
to keep from losing the opportunity for engagement.  Pompey sets
sail at sun-down.  Those who were assembled on the wall to guard it
were called back by the signal that had been agreed on, and hurry to
the ships by familiar routes.  The soldiers, having positioned the
ladders, scale the walls but, warned by the Brundisians to avoid the
hidden stakes and trenches, come to a halt and reach the harbor after
being led on a long detour, and they capture, using small boats,
only two ships that had run aground on Caesar's jetties, along with
the soldiers in them.
