14.1 Calenus legionibus equitibusque Brundisii in naves impositis, ut
erat praeceptum a Caesare, quantum navium facultatem habebat, naves
solvit paulumque a portu progressus litteras a Caesare accipit,
quibus est certior factus portus litoraque omnia classibus
adversariorum teneri.  Quo cognito se in portum recipit navesque
omnes revocat.  Una ex his, quae perseveravit neque imperio Caleni
obtemperavit, quod erat sine militibus privatoque consilio
administrabatur, delata Oricum atque a Bibulo expugnata est; qui de
servis liberisque omnibus ad impuberes supplicium sumit et ad unum
interficit.  Ita exiguo tempore magnoque casu totius exercitus salus
constitit.


Calenus had enough ships to load the infantry and calvary at
Brundisium, as Caesar had commanded.  He ordered the ships out to
sea, and received letters from Caesar after sailing just a bit from
the harbor, in which it was confirmed that all the harbors and coasts
were held by the enemy's fleet.  And after learning this, he returned
to the harbor and recalled all ships.  One of these didn't comply
with Calenus' order, but continued on, because it held no soldiers
and was operating in a private capacity.  It was carried to Oricos
and captured by Bibulus; who inflicted punishment on all slaves and
freemen up to the age of puberty and killed all of the men.  Thus,
the safety of the whole army stood in a short time and by a great
accident.

