72.1 His rebus tantum fiduciae ac spiritus Pompeianis accessit, ut
non de ratione belli cogitarent, sed vicisse iam viderentur.  Non
illi paucitatem nostrorum militum, non iniquitatem loci atque
angustias praeoccupatis castris et ancipitem terrorem intra
extraque munitiones, non abscisum in duas partes exercitum, cum
altera alteri auxilium ferre non posset, causae fuisse cogitabant.
Non ad haec addebant non concursu acri facto, non proelio
dimicatum, sibique ipsos multitudine atque angustiis maius
attulisse detrimentum, quam ab hoste accepissent.  Non denique
communes belli casus recordabantur, quam parvulae saepe causae vel
falsae suspicionis vel terroris repentini vel obiectae religionis
magna detrimenta intulissent, quotiens vel ducis vitio vel culpa
tribuni in exercitu esset offensum; sed, proinde ac si virtute
vicissent, neque ulla commutatio rerum posset accidere, per orbem
terrarum fama ac litteris victoriam eius diei concelebrabant.


These things added so much confidence and spirit to Pompey's men,
that they no longer thought about a plan of war, but saw
themselves as having already won.  They didn't realize that part
of the cause had been the fewness of our soldiers, or the
unevenness of the ground, the confined approaches, the occupation
of the camp, and the double-facing panic inside and outside the
fortifications, nor that the two parts of the army were cut off
from each other, so that one part was unable to aid the other.
Nor did they admit to themselves that it was not by a bitter
attack waged, nor by a battle fought, but by their superior
numbers, and that our loss was caused more by the confined
approaches than by the enemy.  In short, they didn't remember the
ordinary accidents of war, how often a small cause or mistaken
mistrust or sudden panic or religious anxiety have occasioned
great defeats, as often as an offense in the army might be either
by the fault of a leader or the failure of a tribune; but,
accordingly, as if they had been victorious by their courage, and
nothing could have happened to change this, they made the victory of this
day known through the world through reports and letters.
