Book I section  [42] 

Postero die omnem exercitum intra fossam continet et, quod
longius erat agger petendus, in praesentia similem rationem
operis instituit singulaque latera castrorum singulis attribuit
legionibus munienda fossasque ad eandem magnitudinem perfici
iubet; reliquas legiones in armis expeditas contra hostem
constituit.  Afranius Petreiusque terrendi causa atque operis
impediendi copias suas ad infimas montis radices producunt et
proelio lacessunt, neque idcirco Caesar opus intermittit
confisus praesidio legionum trium et munitione fossae.  Illi non
diu commorati nec longius ab infimo colle progressi copias in
castra reducunt.  Tertio die Caesar vallo castra communit;
reliquas cohortes, quas in superioribus castris reliquerat,
impedimentaque ad se traduci iubet.


On the next day he secures his entire army within the ditch and,
because materials for a rampart needed travel from far away, he
puts in place a similar plan for the fortifications for the
present.  He assigns each side of the camp to by defended by a
single legion and orders the ditches to be completed to the same
size.  He sets the rest of the legions facing the enemy,
carrying light arms.  Afranius and Petreius for the sake of
arousing fear and to hinder the fortification, lead their troops
forward to the foot of the mountain and provoke a battle.  But
Caesar does not interrupt the work on account of that, having
confidence in the garrison of three legions and the
fortification of the ditch.  They didn't wait for him very long,
but those who had recently marched out from the low hill
withdraw to the camp.  On the third day Caesar fortifies the
camp with palisades; he orders the remaining cohorts (which he
had left in the last camp) and the baggage to be brought over to
him.

