76.1 Quibus rebus confectis flens Petreius manipulos circumit
militesque appellat, neu se neu Pompeium, imperatorem suum,
adversariis ad supplicium tradant, obsecrat.  Fit celeriter concursus
in praetorium.  Postulat, ut iurent omnes se exercitum ducesque non
deserturos neque prodituros neque sibi separatim a reliquis consilium
capturos.  Princeps in haec verba iurat ipse; idem iusiurandum adigit
Afranium; subsequuntur tribuni militum centurionesque; centuriatim
producti milites idem iurant.  Edicunt, penes quem quisque sit
Caesaris miles, ut producatur: productos palam in praetorio
interficiunt.  Sed plerosque ei, qui receperant, celant noctuque per
vallum emittunt.  Sic terror oblatus a ducibus, crudelitas in
supplicio, nova religio iurisiurandi spem praesentis deditionis
sustulit mentesque militum convertit et rem ad pristinam belli
rationem redegit.


After finishing this, Petreius, in tears, walked among the infantry
and addressed the soldiers, imploring them, on his knees, to betray
neither himself nor Pompey, their commander, to their enemies.  An
assembly was quickly convened at his tent.  He demanded that they
all, men and commanders, swear that they'd not desert and would
neither give nor take advice separately from the others.  Their
leader himself swore, using these very words; he forced the same oath
on Afranius; the military tribunes and centurions followed them; the
soldiers were led forward in companies and swore the same.  It was
proclaimed, that if anyone had a soldier of Caesar's in his power,
for him to bring him out: those who were brought out were publicly
killed at the general's tent.  But most of the soldiers who had taken
men in hid them until night and then sent them out through the
palisades.  In this way the alarm exhibited by their leaders, the
severity of the punishment, and the new sense of duty from the oath
destroyed the hope for a quick surrender and turned the soldiers'
hearts and brought things back to the former plan for war.

