Book I section [29] 

Caesar etsi ad spem conficiendi negotii maxime probabat
coactis navibus mare transire et Pompeium sequi,
priusquam ille sese transmarinis auxiliis confirmaret,
tamen eius rei moram temporisque longinquitatem timebat,
quod omnibus coactis navibus Pompeius praesentem
facultatem insequendi sui ademerat.  Relinquebatur, ut
ex longinquioribus regionibus Galliae Picenique et a
freto naves essent exspectandae.  Id propter anni tempus
longum atque impeditum videbatur.  Interea veterem
exercitum, duas Hispanias confirmari, quarum erat altera
maximis beneficiis Pompei devincta, auxilia, equitatum
parari, Galliam Italiamque temptari se absente nolebat.




Even though Caesar was particularly keen on getting on
with the business of sailing across the sea and pursuing
Pompey, before he might establish his forces on the
other side of the sea, he nevertheless feared delay and
length of time for this, because, by removing the entire
fleet, Pompey had deprived him of the means at hand for
overtaking him.  He remained where he was, expecting
ships from the more remote regions of Gaul and Picenum
and from the straits.  This seemed time-consuming and
difficult on account of the time of year.  In the
meantime he was unwilling for the experienced army, the
two Spanish provinces, of which one was obligated to
Pompey by a great many services, to be strengthened, or
for the auxilies and cavalry to be readied, or for Gaul
and Italy to be attacked in his absence.
