30.1 Quibus de causis consilio convocato de summa rerum
deliberare incipit.  Erant sententiae, quae conandum omnibus
modis castraque Vari oppugnanda censerent, quod in huiusmodi
militum consiliis otium maxime contrarium esse arbitrarentur;
postremo praestare dicebant per virtutem in pugna belli
fortunam experiri, quam desertos et circumventos ab suis
gravissimum supplicium perpeti.  Erant, qui censerent de tertia
vigilia in castra Cornelia recedendum, ut maiore spatio
temporis interiecto militum mentes sanarentur, simul, si quid
gravius accidisset, magna multitudine navium et tutius et
facilius in Siciliam receptus daretur.


For these reasons Curio convened a council and began to
consider the most important of these matters.  Some were of the
opinion that recommended making the attempt at all costs and
attacking Varius' camp, because in their deliberations they
thought that idleness was not good at all for this sort of
soldiers.  In the end they said that it would be better to put
their fortune to the test in battle, and to prevail by their
courage, than to suffer a horrible punishment surrounded and
alone.  There were those who recommended a withdrawl to the
Cornelian camp during the third watch, so that after more time
the soldiers' minds might be quieted, while, if something worse
were to befall them, a retreat to Sicily could be provided both
more safely and more easily with a large mass of ships.


