84.1 Tandem omnibus rebus obsessi, quartum iam diem sine pabulo
retentis iumentis, aquae, lignorum, frumenti inopia colloquium petunt
et id, si fieri possit, semoto a militibus loco.  Ubi id a Caesare
negatum et, palam si colloqui vellent, concessum est, datur obsidis
loco Caesari filius Afranii.  Venitur in eum locum, quem Caesar
delegit.  Audiente utroque exercitu loquitur Afranius: non esse aut
ipsis aut militibus succensendum, quod fidem erga imperatorem suum
Cn. Pompeium conservare voluerint.  Sed satis iam fecisse officio
satisque supplicii tulisse perpessos omnium rerum inopiam; nunc vero
paene ut feras circummunitos prohiberi aqua, prohiberi ingressu, neque
corpore dolorem neque animo ignominiam ferre posse.  Itaque se victos
confiteri; orare atque obsecrare, si qui locus misericordiae
relinquatur, ne ad ultimum supplicium progredi necesse habeat.  Haec
quam potest demississime et subiectissime exponit.


At last, when they were hemmed in every which way, held in check for a
fourth day now, without forage for their beasts, and lacking water,
firewood, and grain, they requested a parlay.  And that it, if at all
possible, be set far away from the soldiers.  This stipulation Caesar
refused, but assented to the parley if they were willing for it to be
public. Then Afranius' son was handed over as a hostage for Caesar.
The parley took place in the location of Caesar's choosing.  Afranius
spoke in the hearing of both armies: saying that they shouldn't be
judged by either themselves or by their soldiers, because they wished
to maintain their loyalty towards General Pompey.  But they'd now done
their duty well enough and the men who had endured their fill of
suffering had borne all depravations; now truly almost like wild
beasts they were hemmed in and kept from water, their advance checked,
and that they couldn't bear either the suffering to their bodies or
the dishonor to their souls.  And that so the conquered acknowledged
themselves; begged and implored, if there was any spot of mercy left,
that they would not necessarily have to proceed to the ultimate
penalty.  He set these things forth as humbly and submissively as he
could.

