Book I section 4: 

Omnibus his resistitur, omnibusque oratio consulis, Scipionis, Catonis
opponitur. Catonem veteres inimicitiae Caesaris incitant et dolor
repulsae. Lentulus aeris alieni magnitudine et spe exercitus ac provinciarum et
regum appellandorum largitionibus movetur, seque alterum fore Sullam inter suos
gloriatur, ad quem summa imperii redeat. Scipionem eadem spes provinciae atque
exercituum impellit, quos se pro necessitudine partiturum cum Pompeio
arbitratur, simul iudiciorum metus, adulatio atque ostentatio sui et potentium,
qui in re publica iudiciisque tum plurimum pollebant. Ipse Pompeius, ab inimicis
Caesaris incitatus, et quod neminem dignitate secum exaequari volebat, totum se
ab eius amicitia averterat et cum communibus inimicis in gratiam redierat,
quorum ipse maximam partem illo affinitatis tempore iniunxerat Caesari; simul
infamia duarum legionum permotus, quas ab itinere Asiae Syriaeque ad suam
potentiam dominatumque converterat, rem ad arma deduci studebat.

All of these are refused, and the consul Scipio's and Cato's speech is set down
against all of them.  An old emnity for Caesar and the pain of rejection stir
Cato. Lentulus is disturbed by the amount of money that was spent and by the
expectation of the army and of the provinces and by the largess of kings to be
solicited, and he boasts among his men that he would be another Sulla, to whom
the highest matters of command would return.  Likewise, Scipio is compelled by
the expectation of the province and the armies, which he himself considers in
the face of the necessity of sharing them with Pompey, at the same time the
dread of the courts, the flattery and ostentation of his men and of those with
power, who exerted the most influence in the republic and in the courts at that
time.  Pompey himself, urged on by the enemies of Caesar, and because he wanted
no one to be made his equal in dignity, had turned himself completely away from
his friendship and returned his favor to their common enemies, most of whom were
from the time of his alliance by marriage to Caesar; likewise agitated by the
the disgrace of the two legions, which he had called back from the road to Asia
and Syria to convert to his own power and despotism, he busied himself with the
matter of being drawn to arms.

