20.1 Eisdem temporibus M. Caelius Rufus praetor causa debitorum suscepta
initio magistratus tribunal suum iuxta C. Treboni, praetoris urbani,
sellam collocavit et, si quis appellavisset de aestimatione et de
solutionibus, quae per arbitrum fierent, ut Caesar praesens
constituerat, fore auxilio pollicebatur.  Sed fiebat aequitate decreti
et humanitate Treboni, qui his temporibus clementer et moderate ius
dicendum existimabat, ut reperiri non possent, a quibus initium
appellandi nasceretur.  Nam fortasse inopiam excusare et calamitatem aut
propriam suam aut temporum queri et difficultates auctionandi proponere
etiam mediocris est animi; integras vero tenere possessiones, qui se
debere fateantur, cuius animi aut cuius impudentiae est?  Itaque, hoc
qui postularet reperiebatur nemo.  Atque ipsis, ad quorum commodum
pertinebat, durior inventus est Caelius.  Et ab hoc profectus initio, ne
frustra ingressus turpem causam videretur, legem promulgavit, ut sexenni
die sine usuris creditae pecuniae solvantur.


At the same time Praetor M. Caelius Rufus, having taken on the cause of
debtors, at the onset of his magistracy set up his tribunal seat near to
C. Trebonus, the city praetor.  And he promised that he would aid anyone
who had a complaint about the estimation or the payments that had been
made through arbiters, as Caesar had presently established.  But it
happened that by the fairness of the decree and the humanity of
Trebonus, who in these times judged that the law ought to be mercifully
and restrainedly applied, that no grounds could be found from which to
initiate an appeal.  For perhaps even now it is ordinary for the mind to
excuse the scarcity and and to bewail the disaster, either one's own or
that in general, and to propose the difficulties in holding an auction;
indeed to hang on to all their possessions, who would admit that they
owe, it is of whose mind or of whose reproach?  And so no man was found
who demanded this.  And Caelius was found to be sterner towards those to
whom the convienent opportunity was being extended.  And having
proceeded on this from the beginning, lest he seem to have taken on the
ugly cause in vain, he proclaimed the law, so that the loaned money
should be discharged over a period of six years, without interest.
