41. THE PASSAGE OF THE ALPS

Postquam Ligurēs hōc modō superātī sunt, Herculēs quam
celerrimē progressus est et post paucōs diēs ad Alpēs pervēnit.
Necesse erat hās transīre, ut in Italiam bovēs ageret; rēs tamen
summae erat difficultātis. Hī enim montēs, quī ulteriōrem ā
citeriōre Galliam dīvidunt, nive perennī sunt tectī; quam ob causam
neque frūmentum neque pābulum in hīs regiōnibus invenīrī potest.
Herculēs igitur antequam ascendere coepit, magnam cōpiam
frūmentī et pābulī comparāvit et hōc commeātū bovēs onerāvit.
Postquam in hīs rēbus trēs diēs cōnsumpserat, quartō diē profectus
est, et contrā omnium opīniōnem bovēs incolumēs in Italiam
trādūxit.

After the Ligurians had been overcome in this way, Hercules
marched forward as quickly as he could and arrived at the Alps
after a few days.  He needed to cross these mountains to drive the
oxen into Italy; but the business was of the utmost difficulty.
For these mountains, which separate farther and nearer Gaul, are
covered in perennial snow; which means that neither grain nor
fodder can be found in this region.  Therefore Hercules started up
first, collecting a great quantity of grain and fodder and loading
the oxen with these supplies.  After he had spent three days doig
this, he set out on the fourth day, and, contrary to everyone's
expectation, led the oxen safely into Italy.

