57. THE WICKED UNCLE

Erant ōlim in Thessaliā duo frātrēs, quōrum alter Aesōn, Peliās
alter appellābātur. Aesōn prīmō rēgnum obtinuerat; at post paucōs
annōs Peliās, rēgnī cupiditāte adductus, nōn modō frātrem suum
expulit, sed etiam in animō habēbat Iāsonem, Aesōnis fīlium,
interficere. Quīdam tamen ex amīcīs Aesōnis, ubi sententiam
Peliae cognōvērunt, puerum ē tantō perīculō ēripere cōnstituerunt.
Noctū igitur Iāsonem ex urbe abstulērunt, et cum posterō diē ad
rēgem rediissent, eī renuntiāvērunt puerum mortuum esse. Peliās
cum hoc audīvisset, etsī rē vērā magnum gaudium percipiēbat,
speciem tamen dolōris praebuit et quae causa esset mortis
quaesīvit. Illī autem cum bene intellegerent dolōrem eius falsum
esse, nesciō quam fābulam dē morte puerī fīnxērunt.

There once were two brothers in Thessaly, one of whom was named
Aeson, and the other Pelias.  As the elder, Aeson obtained the
kingdom; but after a few years Pelias, drawn by a desire for rule,
not only drove his brother out, but even had in mind to kill
Jason, Aeson's son.  But when some of Aeson's friends learned of
Pelias' purpose, they arranged to rescue the boy from such a great
danger. And so they stole Jason out of the city in the night, and
when they returned to the king on the next day, they told him that
the boy was dead.  After Pelias heard this, although he felt great
joy in reality, he nonetheless gave the appearance of sorrow and
asked what the cause of death had been.  But since they well
understood that his sorrow was faked, they made up some story or
other about the death of the boy.
