83. THE RESCUE

Ulixēs cum ab hōrā septimā ad vesperum exspectāsset, veritus nē
sociī suī in perīculō versārentur, nōnnullōs ē reliquīs mīsit, ut quae
causa esset morae cognōscerent. Hī igitur in terram expositī ad
vicum quī non longē aberat sē contulerunt; quō cum vēnissent,
sociōs suōs quasi vīnō ēbriōs repperērunt. Tum ubi causam
veniendī docuērunt, eīs persuādere cōnābantur ut sēcum ad nāvem
redīrent. Illī tamen resistere ac manū sē defendere coepērunt, saepe
clamitantēs sē numquam ex eō locō abitūrōs. Quae cum ita essent,
nuntiī rē infectā ad Ulixem rediērunt. Hīs rēbus cognitīs ipse cum
omnibus quī in nāvī relictī erant ad locum vēnit; et sociōs suōs
frustrā hortātus ut suā sponte redīrent, manibus eōrum post terga
vinctīs invitōs ad nāvem reportāvit. Tum ancorīs sublātīs quam
celerrimē ē portū solvit.

After Ulysses had waited from 7 in the morning until evening, he
feared that his companions had fallen into danger and sent several
of his remaining men to find out the reason for the delay.  And so
these men set out into the region and betook themselves to a village
that was not far off.  And when they had arrived, they discovered
their companions as though they were drunk on wine.  Then, after
they informed them of why they'd come, they tried to persuade them
to return to the ship with them.  But those men commenced to resist
and to defend themselves with their fists, often crying out that
they would never leave this place.  As a result, the messengers
returned to Ulysses without success.  When he became acquainted with
these matters he himself came to the spot with every man who was
left on the ship; and after fruitlessly urging his companions to
return of their own accord, bound their hands behind their backs and
hauled them back to the ship. Then he weighed anchor and sailed out
of the harbor with all speed.
